---
layout: pst
title: "Sumac"
author: "Imran Rashid"
published: true
---

We're proud to announce the release of **[Sumac](https://github.com/quantifind/Sumac)**, our first open source library.
Sumac is a simple, lighweight library for parsing command line arguments in Scala.  It is available for download on
Sonatype; to use, add this to your sbt definitions:

    "com.quantifind" % "sumac_2.9.3" % "0.1"

Another Argument Parsing Library?
------

We know, there are already lots of argument parsing libaries out there, even scala specific ones.  Does the world really
need yet another one?

Yes, it does.  Most libraries require ludicrous amounts of configuration to define even the simplest set of arguments.
Sumac gets rid of all the boilerplate.

As an example, say you want to write a program that prints out all integers in a range along with their squares.  So you need
two arguments, "from" and "to", both integers.  With Sumac, just make a class that extends `FieldArgs` with appropriately
named and typed fields.

    import com.quantifind.sumac.FieldArgs

    class SquareArgs extends FieldArgs {
      var from: Int = _
      var to: Int = _
    }

We can make a program that uses those arguments by extending `ArgMain`:

    import com.quantifind.sumac.{ArgMain, FieldArgs}

    object PrintSquares extends ArgMain[SquareArgs] {
      def main(args: SquareArgs) {
        (args.from to args.to).foreach{i =>
          System.out.println(i + "\t" + (i*i))
        }
      }
    }

And we're done!  Sumac automatically figures out the names & types of the arguments from the fields of `SquareArgs`, using
reflection.  Take a second to appreciate how DRY this makes your code.  In your code, you already name your arguments and
 give them types.  You don't need to repeat that information at all.  Nor do you get your arguments parsed into some
 weird "holder" object -- you wanted an `Int`, so Sumac gave you an `Int`.

Mixing Traits For Composable Arguments
------

So far so good, but we've basically just recreated functionality that already exists in Optional, another arg parsing
library.  In fact, Optional lets you put the argument names right in your definition of `main`, without making you
create the helper "Args" class.

But it turns out that having your arguments live in a well-defined class is a good thing, for a number of reasons.  The
most important one is that you can create standard sets of arguments using traits, then mix them together into different
Arg classes.

For example, lets say that you often find yourself in need of one or more of:

* A connection to [MongoDB](http://mongodb.org)
* A [SparkContext](http://spark-project.org)
* A customer ID
* A location for data files

You might define the following traits:

    trait MongoArgs extends FieldArgs {
      var mongo: String = _
      def mongoConn: MongoConnection = ...
    }

    trait SparkContextArgs extends FieldArgs {
      var sparkMaster: String = _
      var sparkJobName: String = _
      def sparkContext: SparkContext = ...
    }

    trait CustomerArgs extends FieldArgs {
      var customerId: Int = _
    }

    trait DataFileArgs extends FieldArgs {
      var transactionLogDirs: List[String] = _
      var monthlyRollupDir: String = _
      def transactionLogRdd(sc: SparkContext) =
        sc.hadoopFile(transactionLogDirs.mkString(","))
    }

Then you might define a a few different programs that make use of these traits:

    class CustomerReportArgs extends SparkContextArgs with CustomerArgs with DataFileArgs
    object CustomerReport extends ArgMain[CustomerReportArgs] {
      def main(args: CustomerReportArgs) {
        val sc = args.sparkContext
        val logs = args.transactionLogRdd(sc)
        // ... use spark to analyze data for one customer ...
      }
    }

    class RollupBuilderArgs extends SparkContextArgs with DataFileArgs with MongoArgs {
      var useApproximateRollups: Boolean = false
    }
    object RollupBuilder extends ArgMain[RollupBuilderArgs] {
      def main(args: RollupBuilderArgs) {
        val sc = args.sparkContext
        val logs = sc.hadoopFile(args.transactionLogDir)
        val config = OurCustomConfig(args.mongoConnection)
        val rollups = if (args.useApproximateRollups) {
          // ...
        } else {
          // ...
        }
        rollups.saveAsTextFile(args.monthlyRollupDir + ...)
      }
    }

    class ShowCustomerMetaArgs extends CustomerArgs with MongoArgs
    object ShowCustomerMeta extends ArgMain[ShowCustomerMetaArgs] {
      def main(args: ShowCustomerMetaArgs) {
        val config = OurCustomConfig(args.mongoConnection)
        println(config.getCustomerConfig(args.customerId))
      }
    }

By defining the traits once, we get to

1. Standardize the names for arguments.  After a few uses, we learn to always use "--mongo <blah>", not "--mongoHost
 <blah>" or "--mongoDB <blah>", even if its my first use of a particular class.
2. Define common helper methods that are easily shared.

We're not limited to using fields defined in the standard traits -- individual programs can always add in
their own arguments.  For example, with `RollupBuilder`  we can add the argument "--useApproximateRollups true" to
 control its behavior.

Of course, none of this would be possible without the power of traits in Scala :)

And That's Not All!
------

There's a lot more to Sumac:

* Out-of-the-box support for parsing `String`,`Int`,`Long`,`Float`,`Double`,`Boolean`,`File`,`Regex`, as well as `List`s and `Set`s
whose type parameter is any of the other supported types.  (Well, actually you can only use a type parameter that extends
 `AnyRef`, because of the limitations of using java's reflection.)
* Easily define your own custom parser for other types.  (We use this to parse joda `DateTime` objects.)
* You can add custom validation logic, eg. to make sure `limit > 0` or to make sure `start < end`
* If you don't want the command line argument to have the same name as the field, you can customize it with an Annotation.
* The code is very modular.  In particular, definition of arguments is totally separate from parsing.  At quantifind,
we use this create internal tools which convert an argument list into a simple web UI.
* Using args objects leads to composable programs.  Its very easy to take a program which was written to be called from
the command line, and now call it from within another program, by just filling in the appropriate arg object.
* Super lightweight.  Its a small amount of scala code, with *no* external dependencies at all.
* We're working on adding support for pulling arguments out of [ZooKeeper](http://zookeeper.apache.org) in the "zk"
    module.  It's already working, but hasn't been tested much and api changes are still likely.

Open Source
-----

We're really happy to be releasing this as open source as a way to give back.  Sumac is solving such a general purpose
problem that we want everyone to take advantage of it.  After all, we were inspired by Optional, another open source
project.  We use Sumac very extensively, have good units tests, and feel that its definitely ready
 to be integrated into production environments.

That's not to say its "complete" by any means -- there is a long list of features we'd still like to add when we get
around to it.  We'd love for the community as a whole to improve upon it by giving feedback and submitting pull requests.

